Welcome one and all the concluding session of our Pursue Peace Convention is about to begin
As you watch the music video presentation
Reflect on how learning about our creator and speaking about him to others can help us endure any test of faith with joy and peace
Please enjoy the video
Please enjoy the video presentation
Reflect on how learning about him to others can help us endure any test of faith with joy and peace
Welcome to the final portion of this convention, which corresponds to the Sunday afternoon session on your program
The scripture theme is taken from Romans 15 13
Which says in part
May the God who gives hope fill you with all joy and peace
To begin let's sing a song that describes the blessings that God's kingdom will bring
The song is number 23 entitled Jehovah begins his rule
Song number 23 in part one of our feature Bible drama
We saw how Jehovah gave peace to his servants in the past as
We near the conclusion of this system of things
How can we strengthen our confidence that Jehovah will fulfill his promises for the future?
We now invite you to watch part two of the feature Bible drama
Jehovah guides us in the way of peace
Bible prophecy is a fascinating subject
Prophecy is far more than just predictions about the future
Jehovah knows all the facts
He can even control and change factors to ensure the outcome he desires
At Isaiah 55 11 he says
My word that goes out of my mouth will not return to me without results and it will have sure success
Jehovah's prophecies have a perfect record of success
He has led his people in the past
So when he prophesies that he'll lead his people to real lasting peace in the future
This is in a prediction
It's a guarantee
The prophecies given to Daniel clearly show that God's kingdom will without a doubt bring lasting peace for all mankind
I found a man from the axiles of Judah who could make no interpretation to the king
I know who he is
Can you really make known to me the dream that I saw that it's interpretation?
This is your dream
Jehovah is the great time keeper
The prophetic portions of the book of Daniel built faith by showing that Jehovah knows the course of history centuries even millenniums in advance
While portions of these prophecies were fulfilled in Daniel's time many of the details are being fulfilled right down to our day
So as we discover the significance of these prophecies we're excited about what lies ahead and our confidence grows as we discern how Jehovah has been leading his people all along
In the days of those kingdoms
The God of heaven will set up a kingdom
That will never be destroyed
The divine dream that Daniel interprets for King Nebuchadnezzar
constitutes a prophecy
Crucial for the lasting peace of mankind
A promise from Jehovah to set up a kingdom that would be vastly superior to earthly kingdoms
History has shown us how every type of human government imaginable has failed
So how would Jehovah's government come?
When would it arrive?
These were questions Daniel himself likely had
Jehovah is a revealer of secrets
He would eventually answer these questions in due time
As a diligent student of the Scriptures, the prophet Daniel had full faith and confidence in
Jehovah's ability to schedule events and bring them about and now likely in his 90s
Daniel was particularly interested in prophecies
Regarding the restoration of his beloved city Jerusalem
70 years at Babylon are fulfilled. I will turn my attention to you
And I will make good my promise
By bringing you back to this place
Jeremiah's prophecy had given Daniel hope because it indicated that Jews would soon return to their homeland of Judah and
Rebuild Jerusalem along with its temple
Now make sense that Daniel would be interested in the restoration of the temple because from the time of King Solomon
The temple in Jerusalem was the world center for worship of Jehovah
So it was very important to the Jews
In the Scriptures, the temple was often called the House of Jehovah
Now after Jehovah allowed young Daniel on the rest of the Israelites to be taken captive to Babylon
The city of Jerusalem and the temple were destroyed
So naturally a God-fearing man like Daniel would be interested in seeing the temple rebuilt
Again as a man of faith Daniel suffocates Jehovah
Oh Jehovah
He's due here
To forgive
Oh Jehovah, do be attention and act
To not delay for your own sake
Oh my God
Oh Daniel, I'm to give you insight and understanding
The visit of this angel gave Daniel some answers and a hope
Jehovah's messenger provided so many details of promises to come
Jehovah assured Daniel that the Jews would be restored to their homeland
Their exile in Babylonia was almost over
But that wasn't the end of the angel's message
He gave Daniel insight into something of far greater significance
Daniel was told when God's people could expect the arrival of the foretold Messiah
The Messiah would be the ruler who would make it possible for obedient humans
to regain the blessing of perfect life
Free from sickness, free from death
The Messiah would pave the way for lasting peace for mankind
What a strengthening message for Daniel to receive
And he likely had some questions
The angel told Daniel that Jerusalem and its temple would be rebuilt before the Messiah arrived
Yet at the time Jerusalem and the temple were in shambles
How would they rebuild it and who would be responsible for this
Babylon had been overtaken by Mito Persia
pictured by the silver chest and arms of Nebuchadnezzar's dream image
Not long after this change in world rulership
Persian King Cyrus issued a royal decree
It was a commission from Cyrus himself for the Jews to return to Jerusalem and rebuild the temple
King Cyrus released the Jews was in notable contrast with the Babylonians desire to keep them captive
Cyrus even authorized funds from the king's house to cover construction expenses
Why would this pagan ruler have any interest in first of all letting the captive Jews free
And secondly
Financing the rebuilding of their temple in Jerusalem
Ezra's words at second chronicles 3622 tell us
Jehovah stirred the spirit of King Cyrus of Persia
Jehovah can maneuver events to make sure his word is fulfilled
He can use anyone to accomplish his purpose
And this would include even a foreign king like Cyrus so with this decree
The Jews returned to Judah
Launching a construction project and resettling an entire city was a major undertaking
High priest Jeshua and governors rubble were appointed to take the lead in setting up the altar and rebuilding the temple
But this wasn't without his challenges
Enemies of Judah sought to sabotage the building of the temple attempting to disrupt the peace
Initial attempts to halt the building progress fail however eventually these enemies succeeded in having an official band placed on the temple building work
What was the problem here?
It appears the Jews let fear of man stop the building work after about 14 years of constant opposition
Now there's a bigger picture of play here
Remember Daniel's prophecy foretold that Jerusalem and its temple would be rebuilt before the Messiah arrived
Yet with the work halted the temple remained unfinished
What would that mean for the coming of the Messiah
Jeshua and Zerubbable need a guidance
This is where Jehovah steps in to provide encouragement first through the prophet Haggai
Haggai is clear and powerful message gets right to the heart of the matter
He conveys Jehovah's direction to get up and keep building the temple despite opposition
The Jews had a decision to make here
Would they allow opposition to hinder the work
Or would they listen to Jehovah's words through Haggai and keep rebuilding the temple
To guide them further Jehovah spoke to the prophet Zechariah
And gave him visions to provide the Jews with a message
Zechariah made it clear to the Jews that Jehovah would not allow their opposers to harm them or thwart the temple rebuilding work
It was only with Jehovah's guidance that the Jews would succeed
Energized by Jehovah's motivating words through these two prophets
They courageously resumed construction of the temple and it was inaugurated in 515 BCE
Now it seems that at some point over the following decades the Jews lost their initial zeal
The temple was rebuilt and inaugurated
But Jerusalem's walls and gates remained unfinished with huge gaps left in them
And that was significant because the city was surrounded by enemy nations
Without the protection of these walls, Jerusalem seemed vulnerable
When Nehemiah learned of this, he was visibly distressed
What's going on, Henei?
How are people?
Not good
The conditions are disgraceful
The walls of Jerusalem are broken down
And its gates have been burned with fire
What about the temple?
It stands
But the services are nothing but empty rituals
Most of the people and the priests ignore God's law
Nehemiah must have been shocked to hear about the condition of Jerusalem
At this time, he was serving as cup bearer to the Persian king in Shushan
The journey from Shushan to Jerusalem was about a thousand miles
Still, Nehemiah felt compelled to act
Nehemiah rejoiced at the prospect of rebuilding the walls
The Jews at this time were still fearful of their opposers
But Nehemiah was intent on changing that
He knew that Jehovah was behind the work
And if Jehovah is behind something, there's no amount of opposition that can thwart his will
So the wall repairs began
This isn't to say that there were not challenges along the way
Opposers did not give up
I recommend we turn the accusation of sedition against Nehemiah
That's brilliant
Yes
People beg for our help
These opposers threatened the Jews
Schemed against them
And even accused Nehemiah of treason
Nehemiah's peace and the peace of the Jews supporting the work was threatened
But despite the attempts of opposers
Nehemiah and the Jews looked to Jehovah for guidance
And kept working
When Jehovah declares his purpose
There is nothing that can prevent him from carrying it out
So if Jehovah wanted a rebuilt Jerusalem
Complete with rebuilt walls
Nehemiah would have complete faith in Jehovah's ability to support the rebuilding efforts
And with this support
The city walls were completed in just 52 days
Nehemiah the wall is complete
With rebuilt walls and a rebuilt temple
Physically the city was in good condition
However, about 12 years later
Nehemiah returned to Shushan
During his prolonged absence the spiritual state of the Jews deteriorated
It was so sad
As many in Israel fell back into bad practices
Some in the priesthood including high priest Elishib
No longer took their responsibilities seriously
Therefore Jehovah raised up the prophet Malachi to counsel the negligent priests
Why have you leaveites despised Jehovah's name?
despised it
You present a blind, lame or sick animal as a sacrifice
And say that it is nothing bad
Should Jehovah accept it from your hand?
And there's another thing you do
So that he no longer looks favorably on anything you offer
Because you betray the wife of your youth
Although she's your partner, your legal wife
The lips of a priest should safeguard knowledge
And people should seek the law from his mouth
But you, you have made many stumble
Evidently Malachi's words had little effect on the priesthood
Despite his warnings, the people refused to change
When Nehemiah returned
What he found shocked him
For a long time the priests and the Levites have not taken their duties seriously
When the people saw that they stopped bringing in tithes
Without the tithes
Most Levites and singers returned to their fields
Did a liaship not tell the people to bring your provisions
In your absence the prophet Malachi warned him and all the priests
But a liaship
He took our storeroom, emptied it of our provisions
He gave it to buy it to use as a dining hall
In addition to no longer providing financial support
The people started conducting business on the Sabbath
What are you selling today?
Only the best quality fish from tired
They were marrying foreign women
A marrying gizla today
Gizla
That mobile girl
I heard you bind yourself with an oath and a curse not to take away from the nations
This action could have disrupted the line to the Messiah
And it definitely threatened to contaminate pure worship
These men were bringing the restored nation and to disfavor with Jehovah
This is the same reason why Jehovah allowed Babylon to destroy Jerusalem in the first place
So Nehemiah took action against these faithless ones
Please cleanse this room and replace the utensils
Yes, men
And gather all the Levites, the singers, the deputy rulers to me
I'm assigning them all back to their posts
He enforced the strict observance of the Sabbath
What's the meaning of this?
I had to sleep on a ground last night
You know God's law
No work, no business, on the Sabbath
Go
You know the Levites guard the gates and keep the Sabbath home
Don't let anyone in
He disciplined those who had taken foreign wives
Did you not swear never to marry someone who doesn't serve Jehovah
Nehemiah, nobody cares
Did you not?
Yes, yes
Why have you ignored the command of Jehovah and your own oath?
There's no doubt Jehovah's Guide Nehemiah's efforts all along
After a spiritual cleansing was done, a measure of peace was again enjoyed
And with this vigorous rooting out of apostasy
The record of the Hebrew scriptures comes to a close
Now we don't have an inspired record of events in the centuries leading up to Jesus' birth
But history shows that Jerusalem underwent several changes during these years
The Meadow Persian Empire was overtaken by Greece
Represented by the copper belly and thighs of Nebuchadnezzus dream image
While the city seemed to survive the change in control without any physical damage
Its spiritual state was threatened
The Greek Empire set the stage for the spread of Greek language, culture, and religious thought
And Israel was affected by this influence
Years later, King Antiochus IV was determined to eradicate Jewish worship and customs
He went so far as to sacrifice a peg to the Greek God Zeus at the Temple of Jehovah
This was a vicious attempt to defile and stamp out pure worship
However, the desecration had the opposite effect
It sparked an uprising of zealous Jews and three years later they cleansed the temple and rededicated it to Jehovah
About a century later, Jerusalem experienced another change in rulership
As Rome became the dominant world power
Rome corresponded to the legs of iron and Nebuchadnezzus dream image
Under the rule of Herod the Great, Jerusalem enjoyed considerable prosperity
Herod's greatest work however was the reconstruction of the temple and its building complex
The temple and its daily sacrifices remained an operation down to Jesus' day
The Bible record picks up before Jesus was born
Hey Jehovah, mercy on us. What's happening? Is the Son of God already?
Are they? Are they angels?
Do not be afraid
For look, I am declaring to you good news of a great joy that all the people will have
For today there was born to you in David City a Savior who is Christ the Lord
Jesus' birth and ministry fulfilled many prophecies
In 29 CE Jehovah anointed Jesus with Holy Spirit
This corresponds exactly to the words of Daniel's prophecy that Jehovah gave him more than 500 years earlier
The promised Messiah had arrived
Early in his ministry, Jesus read these words from the prophecy of Isaiah
The scroll of Isaiah the prophet reads
Jehovah's Spirit is upon me
Because he anointed me to declare good news to the poor
He sent me to proclaim liberty to the captives and a recovery of sight to the blind
to send the crushed ones away free to preach Jehovah's acceptable year
Today this scripture that you just heard is fulfilled
Holy Spirit empowered Jesus to perform many miracles in just a few short years on earth
This had a profound effect on the people living in his day
I'm a very sick woman
I've suffered from a flow of blood for some 12 years
He can heal me even if I could touch
Just the fringes of his outer garment. I will get well
Who touched my outer garments?
Who touched me
Please forgive me my heart. It was I who touched you
Faith in you
But if I could just touch the fringes of your outer garment
I could get well
Take courage daughter
Your faith has made you well
The miracles Jesus before more like anything the people had seen before
Finally the people had hope
A hope for the future a hope for peace
He even demonstrated that he had power far beyond any human ruler
Lord Mary is here. My brother would not have died
Lazarus
Come out
Free him and let him go
There is so much we can learn from Jesus miracles works and teachings
They reveal Jehovah's purpose and power
They show how enjoyable how peaceful life will be under God's Messianic ruler
Humans alive at this time could see visible proof of this
Jesus ministry accomplished so much in just three and a half years
And prophecy regarding the Messiah continued to be fulfilled
As his opposers succeeded in putting him to death
With the sacrifice of Jesus perfect human life
The entire arrangement for worshiping Jehovah had changed
There was no longer a need for animal sacrifices
Pure worship was no longer centered around the temple in Jerusalem
The only way to worship Jehovah
Acceptably was through the Messiah
Now people everywhere could find the way to peace through faith in Jesus ransom sacrifice
The Jewish system of worship under the mosaic law was over
Jerusalem in the temple no longer had Jehovah's favor
Jesus perfect human sacrifice was the only solution for lasting peace
So what did this mean for the city of Jerusalem and the temple
Well before his death
Jesus provided his followers with a warning regarding Jerusalem's destruction
In Luke 21 2021 he says
When you see Jerusalem surrounded by encamped armies
Then know that the desolating of her has drawn near
Let those in the midst of her leave and let those in the countryside not enter into her
A good ruler guides his people
Although it wasn't yet time for him to take the throne as ruler of God's kingdom
Jesus by the way he acted gave us insight into the kind of ruler he would be
By providing first-century Christians with a warning to leave Jerusalem and all Judea
He was guiding them and protecting them
Jesus prophesied the destruction of the city and just a few decades later that prophecy came true
The Roman Empire still had control of Judea and tensions ran high between the Romans and the Jews
Eventually the Jews revolted against Roman rule
With the city surrounded and Roman forces closing in it seemed there was no way out
But Jehovah's word cannot go unfulfilled
For no apparent reason the Roman forces withdrew
For faithful Christians this was their opportunity
It's simple
Those who followed Jesus' direction to leave Judea were guided to safety
For those who delayed escape became difficult or impossible
There was no doubt Jerusalem no longer enjoyed Jehovah's special favor in protection
The city and its temple were completely destroyed
There are parallels we can draw from the warning Jesus gave to those first-century Christians
To the warning we have been given for our day
Jesus gave us one composite sign that indicates the destruction of this current system of things is very close
prophecies in the Bible give us no doubt we are living in the last days
Jehovah has not revealed all the details of how everything will work out
But we know that everything he has revealed will come true
This includes details outlining how world events would unfold in the time of the end
Before mankind would experience permanent peace
Remember Daniel's prophecy indicated that there would be only one dominant world power in place at the time of the end
By world war one the power represented by the feet of iron and clay had emerged
During that war Britain and America forged a partnership that continued through the second world war
This means a special relationship between the British Commonwealth and Empire and the United States of America
Neither the sure prevention of war nor the continuous rise of world organization
We'll begin without what I have called the fraternal association of the English-speaking people
These two countries continue to be a dual English-speaking world power
The characteristics of iron and clay used to represent this world power are significant
And as the toes of the feet were partly of iron and partly of clay
So the kingdom will be partly strong and partly fragile
At times the United States and Britain have displayed iron-like strength through their involvement in armed conflicts
However iron mixed with clay is considerably weakened
This can be observed as common people undermine the Anglo-American world powers ability to act with iron-like strength
As the political and social developments foretold in the Bible come to a climax
We have a measure of peace
We know Jehovah will guide his people even as the world's spiritual and moral conditions sinks to new depths
As many in the first century Jerusalem continued their lives as if nothing had changed
So too today
Many continue on with their lives
Meanwhile we remain alert as we see fulfillment of Bible prophecy right before our eyes
In the days of those kings
The god of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed
The book of Revelation tells us what will soon happen
The political rulers of the world will give the United Nations unprecedented power and authority
The Apostle Paul foretold that the nations will declare peace and security
But it won't prove to be true peace
The nation supporting the UN will attack the institutions of false religion
Then a coalition of earth governments that the prophet Ezekiel calls god of the land of may god will attack God's people
Yet we don't need to be fearful
That's when we can put into action all of the lessons we've learned
Those who trust and obey Jehovah's guidance can look to the near future with confidence
As we've seen
Jehovah has always been in control of the situation
He has never guided his people in a certain direction then failed to provide for them
That's why we can say that the lessons we learn from the faithful men we've studied are more than just lessons
This has been Jehovah paving the way for peace from the start
Looking back
We see exactly how Jehovah has led his people it took many years
But he's been in control the whole time
Would it make sense to think he isn't in control anymore?
No power in heaven or on earth can prevent Jehovah from accomplishing his express purpose
He has never relinquished control and he is still guiding his people
Now think about this
If Jehovah has guided his people to this point
We can have full confidence that trust and obedience to his direction will prove to be our salvation
Even if a way out seems impossible
Jehovah is all powerful
He's going to help us through whatever we may face
We won't have to fight and we won't need to fear annihilation
Jehovah has things under control
Will not be passed on to any other people
It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms and it alone will stand forever
God's kingdom will fill and renew the entire earth
Jehovah's promises will become completely fulfilled
Lasting peace will finally become a reality for all mankind
Just imagine what faithful servants have to look forward to under Jesus' heavenly rule
He will be able to provide what no man ever could
Can you imagine what that will be like?
For look
I am creating new heavens and a new earth
And the former things will not be called to mind
Nor will they come up into the heart
The righteous will possess the earth
And they will live forever on it
He will swallow up death forever
And the sovereign Lord Jehovah will wipe away the tears from all faces
He will wipe out every tear from their eyes
And death will be no more
Neither will morning nor outcry nor pain be anymore
The former things have passed away
At that time the eyes of the blind will be open
And the ears of the deaf will be unstopped
At that time the lame will leap like the deer
And the tongue of the speechless will shout for joy
For waters will burst forth in the wilderness
And streams in the desert plain
They will build houses and live in them
And they will plant vineyards and eat their fruities
For the days of my people will be like the days of a tree
And the work of their hands
My chosen ones will enjoy to the fool
But the meek will possess the earth
And they will find exquisite delight
In the abundance of peace
What a faith strengthening drama
We are at peace knowing that Jehovah is in complete control
All in attendance will be pleased to know that parts one and two
Of the drama documentary
Jehovah guides us in the way of peace
Are available now for download on jw.org
And in the jw library app
Have you enjoyed the original songs that have been featured at recent conventions
We now have the privilege of watching a video medley
And reflecting on the lessons we have learned at our conventions over the past few years
Enjoy
The life should have my song
I was with pain
This is real
Our next song encourages us to look ahead with confidence
The song is entitled
See yourself when all is new
Let's sing together song number 139
That song number 139